PHILADELPHIA — Twelve years ago Wednesday in Boston, it was Senator John Kerry’s presidential convention. But it was Barack Obama’s night.

Mr. Obama, then a little-known state senator in Illinois, delivered a 16-minute keynote speech at the 2004 Democratic National Convention that set his political career in motion. And this week in Philadelphia, a new generation of Democrats is jockeying for attention. Few will have their careers launched with the rocket-fuel intensity that Mr. Obama’s speech provided, but that will not stop them from trying.

On the main stage at the Wells Fargo Center and along the sidelines of the convention, more than a dozen Democratic senators, mayors, governors, cabinet members and state lawmakers are carefully peeking past this year’s presidential election to 2020 or 2024 as they work ballrooms full of delegates, donors and activists who would be critical to the pursuit of a national campaign.

By tradition, and in deference to the current generation, personal ambitions are largely unspoken here as the Democratic faithful gather to anoint Hillary Clinton and to prepare for battle against Donald J. Trump. Asked about their national prospects in the next decade, most quickly demurred.

“I can barely think about what I’m having for lunch today,” joked Kamala Harris, the California attorney general, who is spending the week darting from one grip-and-grin to another. She is running for the Senate this year and is widely seen as a talented national prospect.

Like Ms. Harris, those eager to break out of the pack someday are all here.

Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey gave a booming, passionate speech that was well received in the arena but was criticized by television viewers who thought he was shouting. Mayor Kasim Reed of Atlanta was scheduled to take the main stage on Wednesday. The Castro brothers, Representative Joaquin Castro of Texas and Julián Castro, the secretary of housing and urban development, have both been mentioned as possible chairmen of the Democratic National Committee, though it is not clear whether either wants the job.

John W. Hickenlooper, the governor of Colorado, arrived in Philadelphia with a packed schedule that included a reception with Washington lobbyists, luncheons for the Democratic Governors Association and interviews with national news networks. Gov. Terry McAuliffe of Virginia is here, as are Senators Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and Kirsten Gillibrand of New York, each shaking hands and testing messages.

“Our policies are stuck in the ‘Mad Men’ era,” Ms. Gillibrand said during her time on the podium on Monday, part of the prime-time lineup but before the headliners.

“At every convention, there’s always one bright shining, new star; we just don’t know who it is here yet,” said Stephanie Cutter, a veteran Democratic strategist who was deputy campaign manager for Mr. Obama’s re-election in 2012. “The connections that you make, the fund-raising potential and even the media exposure are huge investments for anyone’s political career.”

By winning the nomination, Mrs. Clinton has broken at least one glass ceiling, giving hope to those who are eager for more women to achieve political success. If she wins, the ultimate ceiling would finally be shattered.

But compared with Republicans, Democrats have seen fewer of their young members rise to top positions in Washington, which can be a springboard to the White House. Beyond Mr. Obama, the leadership of the Democratic Party is an aging one: Nancy Pelosi, the House minority leader, and Harry Reid, the minority leader in the Senate, are both 76. Mrs. Clinton is 68. Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts is 67, and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont is 74.

By contrast, the average age of the Republican House leadership is under 50 — Speaker Paul D. Ryan is 46 — and many of the party’s committee chairmen are relatively young.

If Mrs. Clinton wins the White House in November, the party may need to spend the next eight years discovering which young Democratic politicians can appeal to millennials and win elections. If she loses, the Democratic Party will be under pressure to find a new standard-bearer in just four years.

That could be Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, whose selection as Mrs. Clinton’s running mate immediately made him one of the Democrats best positioned to follow Mrs. Clinton on the national stage.

Mr. Kaine, who is 58, surprised many in his party with a forceful and effective speech when Mrs. Clinton introduced him last week in Florida. His address Wednesday night at the convention provides him the opportunity to do the same in front of a much bigger audience. But his political future will also depend on the verdict that voters deliver this fall.

Other Democrats are not waiting for eight years to start developing a national identity and a network of friends, activists and donors.

On Tuesday, Ms. Harris began her day with an early-morning appearance on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe,” where she gushed about Mrs. Clinton and tried to express understanding for the still-frustrated supporters of Mr. Sanders.

Next up was a stop at a panel discussion titled “Bigger Than the Boomers: Why Millennials Are the Most Important Demographic of 2016,” hosted on the second floor of the Ritz Carlton by Media Matters Action Network, Voto Latino and other liberal groups.

“My sister, Maya, and I joke that we grew up surrounded by a bunch of adults who spent full time marching and shouting about this thing called justice,” Ms. Harris said, offering the kind of biographical introduction that is still necessary for her. “And frankly, that’s why I wanted to be a lawyer.”

It was a short walk to the Marriott in Center City Philadelphia, where Ms. Harris arrived in the huge ballroom on the fifth floor just a few minutes after Mr. Sanders made an appearance. The crowd, some of whom had shouted and booed when Mr. Sanders urged them to support Mrs. Clinton, was still noisy when she took the microphone.

“Had people not marched and shouted, most of us wouldn’t be here this morning,” she said, repeating her story about her parents having been protesters.

She spoke only briefly, but the crowd quieted while she talked about the issues she wants to confront in the Senate: climate change and “Big Oil,” immigration, banking overhaul, college loans and a new “smart crime” approach to the country’s criminal justice problems.

“She’s strong, she’s articulate, she just makes a lot of sense,” said Rich Gipson, a retired teacher from Merced, Calif., who called himself a fan of Ms. Harris’s. “She’s on top of the list. Coming from California, she is naturally going to become a leader of the country.”

Ms. Harris’s message to the Californians in the audience was that the state should assume a leadership role beyond its borders. The state’s huge population and complex issues should give it an outsize role in shaping the way the country deals with its problems, she said.

She was talking about the state, but she might just as well have been talking about her political fortunes. She concluded with a plea that seemed to have an echo of her ambitions.

“Let us lead, like we have been doing in California,” she urged. “Let’s be a leader for our country.”