Biden’s three victories give him an all but insurmountable lead, even as postponed primaries could draw out the process.

After another round of decisive victories — in Florida, Illinois and Arizona on Tuesday — Joseph R. Biden Jr. now holds an all but insurmountable lead in the race for the Democratic nomination.

Bernie Sanders has not yet been mathematically eliminated. And as the coronavirus outbreak causes many states to delay their primaries, it may be months until Mr. Biden wins an outright majority of delegates and becomes the presumptive Democratic nominee for president.

But it is not realistic for Mr. Sanders to overtake Mr. Biden without a titanic shift in the race on a scale with few or no modern precedents. The results on Tuesday confirmed yet again that Mr. Biden holds a commanding national advantage, probably of at least 25 percentage points nationwide, spanning virtually all major demographic groups and regions of the country. He won nearly every county across Illinois, Arizona and Florida, three states that collectively represent just about every facet of American life.

When all of the votes to this point are counted, Mr. Biden will probably hold a lead of around 54 percent to 39 percent in pledged delegates, with nearly 60 percent of the nation’s delegates now in the books. To overtake Mr. Biden, Mr. Sanders would need to win the remaining delegates by around 20 percentage points. It would require a net 40-point improvement over his current standing.

The breadth of Mr. Biden’s advantage denies Mr. Sanders any realistic opportunity for a comeback. Perhaps Mr. Sanders will win a party-run primary or caucus — in Alaska, Hawaii or Wyoming over coming weeks — as he did in North Dakota last week. Otherwise Mr. Biden is the favorite in every remaining primary state. And without victories, Mr. Sanders will be deprived of opportunities to claim the momentum and favorable news coverage to change the trajectory of the race.

If news media organizations projected the outcome of the national nominating contests in the same way they called national elections on election nights, Mr. Biden would be the projected winner of the Democratic nomination on this basis.

Of course, news organizations do not project the winner of nominating contests until a candidate amasses a majority of pledged delegates. Anything can happen.

The likelihood of any potential game-changing event becomes likelier with time. By this measure, the new delays in the Democratic primary schedule as a result of the coronavirus slightly widen whatever narrow path might still exist for Mr. Sanders.

He would have faced an even greater deficit if Ohio had voted on Tuesday as originally scheduled, based on results so far. Georgia and Louisiana, originally scheduled to vote over the next few weeks, might have voted for Mr. Biden by 50 points or more. And Mr. Biden might have won an outright majority of delegates and wrapped up the nomination by late April. Now it is hard to say when he will clinch it.

At least for now, the coming states that have not delayed their contests are relatively favorable to Mr. Sanders. Puerto Rico, on March 29, is a wild card, but that makes it better for Mr. Sanders than any remaining state.

On April 4, Alaska, Hawaii and Wyoming are scheduled to hold party-run contests, a format where Mr. Sanders has generally excelled. All of this leads into Wisconsin on April 7, which is probably a better state for Mr. Sanders than the nation as a whole.

None of this gives Mr. Sanders a credible path to the nomination. He has lost every county bordering Wisconsin, even if it shapes up as a relatively good state for him.

A candidate trailing by 25-plus points needs something more than a win in a relatively good state, like Arizona or Wisconsin. He needs to fundamentally change the race.

In theory, it’s not impossible for Mr. Sanders to win delegates by around 20 percentage points the rest of the way. For that matter, it’s not impossible for Michael Bloomberg to re-enter the race tomorrow and deny Mr. Biden a delegate majority. It’s just not realistic.