Could the coronavirus provide ammunition to Democrats seeking to take down President Trump? Possibly. It could be easy, if he is seen as badly bungling the response. But he has another thing in mind.

After first ignoring warnings about the severity of the crisis and offering a series of conflicting messages, the president is working to project a strong and serious aspect as he confronts what he now acknowledges is a monumental public health emergency.

Democrats came out of the gate promising relief, but the bill they passed — which the president signed this week — looks pale compared to the proposal now being floated by Trump and his Republican allies. They want to send a $1,200 cash payment to all Americans making up to $75,000 a year, as well as offering business loans and large corporate tax cuts.

Many economists say that with unemployment expected to rise as high as 20 percent, even this level of intervention won’t be sufficient to turn back an economic crash. But so far, congressional Democrats are not yet pushing their Republicans to go significantly further than they already have. It has been conservatives like Mitt Romney and Tom Cotton, not leading Democrats, who have loudly called for the government to put cash in Americans’ hands.

Still, in his messages to core supporters, Trump has hardly spoken about the virus at all. He has mentioned it only in one fund-raising email and text message (a week ago, linking to C.D.C. guidance), instead sticking to his typical strategy of attacking Democrats and the media. Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders, meanwhile, have repeatedly discussed the virus in messages to supporters.

Trump has historically been great at raising money online — and besides, polling shows that Republicans are overwhelmingly likely to say they think the threat of the coronavirus has been overblown by the media. Josh Holmes, a top Republican strategist, told our reporter Shane Goldmacher that by avoiding mentioning the virus, Trump’s team appears to be taking an “if it’s not broken, don’t fix it” approach to messaging.

Democratic super PACs are still running ads targeting Trump for his attacks on the Affordable Care Act. And one has already bought $5 million in airtime devoted to ads about his response to the coronavirus crisis.

Tulsi Gabbard dropped out of the Democratic presidential race on Thursday and endorsed Biden, officially leaving Sanders as the last hopeful standing in Biden’s way. “Although I may not agree with the vice president on every issue, I know that he has a good heart and is motivated by his love for our country and the American people,” Gabbard, a congresswoman from Hawaii, wrote in a campaign email. “I’m confident that he will lead our country guided by the spirit of aloha — respect and compassion — and thus help heal the divisiveness that has been tearing our country apart.”

President Trump held a news conference with the White House coronavirus task force on Thursday.