Tempers flared on the Senate floor as Republicans accused Democrats of slowing needed assistance and Democrats said the package fell short.

WASHINGTON — Senate Democrats on Monday blocked action for the second day in a row on a nearly $2 trillion emergency economic aid measure to respond to the coronavirus pandemic, insisting on stronger protections for workers and restrictions for bailed-out businesses as they struggled to reach a deal with the Trump administration.

Despite a sense of desperation in both parties and at the White House about quickly enacting a stabilization package to deliver critical financial support to businesses forced to shutter and relief to American families, sharp ideological differences between Republicans and Democrats were making it difficult to reach a final compromise.

As urgent negotiations continued behind the scenes, the deep well of distrust between Democrats and President Trump was hampering agreement, and the shadow of the last huge government aid program approved by Congress — the Wall Street bailout in 2008 — hung over the talks, a cautionary tale of the political risks of sending federal money to corporations.

The normally staid Senate dissolved into shouting and partisan bickering before the vote, as senators sparred over the stimulus package, which is emerging as the largest in modern history. Republicans blasted Democrats for delaying desperately needed economic aid, while Democrats said the measure under discussion did too little to help ordinary Americans or to ensure that federal money would not be abused by businesses that received aid.

“Are you kidding me?” Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, demanded on the Senate floor. “This is not a juicy political opportunity. This is a national emergency.”

The remarkable scene unfolded the day after Democrats first blocked action on the measure. The 47-to-47 vote on Sunday evening shook markets around the globe on Monday and infuriated Republicans who said it ignored bipartisan talks that had yielded substantial compromises over the outlines of the measure.

The outcome was similar on Monday, as the Senate voted 49 to 46, falling short of the 60 votes that would have been needed to go forward on the stabilization measure. Republicans insisted on holding the vote in the absence of an agreement, seizing an opportunity to portray Democrats as obstacles to a deal.

The markets reacted with a shudder, with the S&P 500 falling about 3 percent, even after the Federal Reserve said it would vastly expand its efforts to shore up businesses and keep markets functioning.

The defeat and the testy exchanges overshadowed an urgent set of negotiations that continued all day behind the scenes between Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, and Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, to iron out remaining differences. Both men reported making progress late Monday afternoon, with Mr. Schumer indicating to colleagues on a call just after 5 p.m. that he was hopeful an agreement could be reached later in the evening, according to people familiar with the discussion.

“We Democrats are trying to get things done, not making partisan speech after partisan speech,” he said on the Senate floor earlier in the day. “Our goal is to reach a deal today, and we are hopeful, even confident, that we will meet that goal.”

Mr. Mnuchin declined to provide specifics as he shuttled between the offices of Mr. Schumer and Mr. McConnell, but said the two sides were “very close” to a deal.

“We’re really cutting down the list of issues,” he told reporters on Monday afternoon. “I think everybody wants to get this done today.”

Hanging over the debate for senators in both parties were unpleasant memories of the stinging backlash from the 2008 and 2009 economic recovery programs that were later condemned on the right and left for helping Wall Street at the expense of working Americans. Democrats said they would not be bullied into supporting the stimulus package by Mr. McConnell, despite evident political risks as they face a battle for control of the Senate in November.

“The fact is, we need to learn from 10 years ago,” said Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio. “If we’re going to do relief package, the money needs to go in the pockets of workers.”

At the heart of the impasse in the Senate is a $425 billion fund created by the bill that the Federal Reserve could leverage for loans to assist broad groups of distressed companies, and an additional $75 billion it would provide for industry-specific loans. Democrats have raised concerns that the funds do not require sufficient transparency or enough guardrails to make sure companies do not use the funds to enrich themselves or take government money and lay off workers. They also argue the measure would give Mr. Mnuchin too much discretion to decide which companies receive the funds, calling the proposal a “slush fund” for the administration.

As the legislation is currently written, Mr. Mnuchin would not have to disclose the recipients until six months after the loans were disbursed. Some Democrats also said the legislation as written could allow Mr. Trump’s real estate empire to take advantage of the federal aid, and after years of being stonewalled by the White House on oversight requests, they worried that the administration would refuse attempts by Congress to keep tabs on the program.

Mr. Mnuchin has argued that bolstering the fund would allow the Federal Reserve to effectively inject $4 trillion into the economy, and that he needs the authority to swiftly support companies and industries that are on the brink of collapse as large sections of the economy shut down. On Monday, he pushed back against the suggestion that the money would become a piggy bank for Mr. Trump’s allies.

“I’ve heard people refer to this as a slush fund,” Mr. Mnuchin said on the Fox Business Network. “It’s not a slush fund.”

Democrats are also pushing for more jobless aid and money for states as part of the agreement.

“Let’s be clear about what we are talking about here: We don’t think your bill works,” said Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut. “This is a policy disagreement, and I have an obligation as a representative of my state to stand up and say when I don’t think a $2 trillion bill is going to solve the problem.”

Only one Democrat, Senator Doug Jones of Alabama, joined Republicans in voting to advance the package.

The debate beforehand was unusually fiery, and it escalated as Mr. Schumer repeatedly cut off attempts by Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, to be recognized to speak.

“This is unbelievable,” Ms. Collins fumed, as other Republicans pushed to allow her to weigh in. She walked over to Mr. Schumer, pointing at him, and said: “You are objecting to my speaking? This is appalling.”

Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, muttering audibly, used a barnyard epithet to express his assessment of the situation.

When Ms. Collins did get to speak, she warned that time was running out to preserve small businesses in her state and across the country teetering on the brink of collapse.

“We don’t have another day,” she said. “We don’t have another hour. We don’t have another minute to delay acting. This is disgraceful.”

An exasperated Senator John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 2 Senate Republican, turned to the Democratic side of the chamber and said, “The country is burning, and your side wants to play political games.”

At the White House, Vice President Mike Pence sought to ratchet up pressure on Democrats to drop their opposition. On a conference call on Monday afternoon, he urged governors to press their states’ representatives to get the bill moving.

“Governors, it will make a real difference,” Mr. Pence said, according to a recording of the call obtained by The New York Times.

Senate Republicans and Democrats have already struck a number of major compromises on the package, including a tentative agreement on sending $1,200 government payments to those earning up to $75,000 a year, with an additional $500 per child. Smaller checks would be sent to those earning more, and there would be an upper eligibility limit of $99,000 in income.

By Monday afternoon, they appeared to be nearing an agreement on hundreds of billions of dollars to support hospitals struggling to care for the thousands infected by the coronavirus.

But Democrats are pushing to strengthen worker protections — arguing that the draft legislation fails to prevent layoffs — and to enforce heavier restrictions on executive compensation and companies’ ability to buy back stock. Led by Mr. Schumer, they are also calling for more funds to send to individual states to help them combat the outbreak and the economic turmoil of having to close businesses and cities.

Democrats also want to extend jobless benefits in the legislation for an additional month. Republicans have already agreed to a large expansion of the unemployment insurance program, broadening it to include self-employed and part-time workers who traditionally have not been eligible, and to cover 100 percent of wages for three months.

There is also disagreement, according to two people familiar with the negotiations but who are unauthorized to discuss them publicly, over how much money to allocate to farmers and whether to expand nutrition assistance benefits. And Democrats have raised concerns about language that could prevent Planned Parenthood and community mental health providers that rely on Medicaid from receiving loans and an extension of an abstinence education program set to expire in May.

In the House, Democrats unveiled their own stimulus package, which would provide more than $2.5 trillion in federal spending. It remained unclear how that 1,400-page measure would be reconciled with any compromise legislation that emerges from the Senate negotiations.

“The Senate Republican bill put corporations first,” Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California said during brief televised remarks.

The House bill, according to summaries circulated by Democrats, would deliver $1,500 in direct payments to individuals and more than $150 billion to hospitals and government health programs, and it would create an unemployment compensation of $600 a week along with regular unemployment benefits.

It would also include a national requirement for 15 days of early voting and no-excuse absentee vote-by-mail and election funding and nearly $60 billion for schools and universities, coupled with free coronavirus treatment and expanded paid leave.

Mr. McConnell and other Republicans spent much of the day blaming Ms. Pelosi, who returned to Washington from San Francisco on Sunday to participate in the stimulus talks, for upending a productive set of bipartisan negotiations. But Ms. Pelosi has repeatedly been engaged in phone calls with Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Schumer, and dispatched her top staff to work in tandem with top Democratic staff in the Senate.

A senior Republican aide, speaking on the condition of anonymity to disclose details of the private negotiations, said Democrats were trying to use the stimulus measure to accomplish long-held, unrelated policy priorities, including expanding collective bargaining rights for unions, implementing an extension of solar and wind tax credits to help the renewable energy industry, and tying aid to airlines to gradual reductions on carbon dioxide emissions that they have long resisted.

The dire economic outlook is not the only critical incentive for Congress to act quickly, as the effects of the coronavirus are increasingly being felt on Capitol Hill. Senate Republicans are already short on members, after Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky tested positive on Sunday for Covid-19, prompting two other Republicans who had contact with him — Senators Mitt Romney and Mike Lee of Utah — to isolate themselves.

A sign taped to the Republican side of the clerk’s desk read “SOCIAL DISTANCE” in red block letters, with “please & thank you” written in cursive underneath.

“We should not be physically present on this floor at this moment,” said Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the No. 2 Senate Democrat, imploring his colleagues to consider remote voting to spare their health and that of their aides. “We know better.”