ALBANY — It had all the trappings of a presidential campaign rollout: the cheering crowd, the flag-draped stage, an appearance and a hearty endorsement from Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.

The topic last week was also ripped from the 2016 campaign trail: a tuition-free college plan. It was the latest in a series of high-profile, left-leaning policy moves that the Democrat behind the event, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, can claim, including the legalization of same-sex marriage, the passage of gun-control laws and a higher minimum wage.

The next day, the governor was at it again. Surrounded by more bunting, he announced a $10 billion overhaul of Kennedy International Airport, the latest “think big” project that he has initiated or completed, including the recently opened Second Avenue subway, a new Tappan Zee Bridge and a revamped Penn Station.

On Monday, Mr. Cuomo was at the 64th floor of One World Trade Center, speaking in high-minded terms about the battles ahead for Democrats both here and beyond.

As Democratic leaders reassess their party’s mission and long-term strategy after the election of Donald J. Trump to the White House, Mr. Cuomo seems eager to quickly position himself as a different sort of Northeast liberal, one capable of building things beyond a social agenda — and remaking a persona that has long rubbed some of his colleagues and voters the wrong way.

Mr. Cuomo and Senators Cory Booker of New Jersey, Sherrod Brown of Ohio and Kamala D. Harris of California, among others, are thought to be on a short, if still amorphous, list of fresher options for 2020. By then, the old guard of potential candidates, represented by Hillary Clinton, Mr. Sanders, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, will all be 70 or older.

Of those who have prompted presidential speculation, Mr. Cuomo seems the keenest to quickly broaden his appeal since the election, and is perhaps the most road-tested in political warfare and theatrics. His appearance with the still-popular Mr. Sanders, whom Mr. Cuomo did not support in last year’s primary campaign, illustrated the governor’s instincts; although the event was Mr. Cuomo’s, he allowed Mr. Sanders to speak last.

“He is fully capable of moving to where the Democratic needle proves to be moving,” said Hank Sheinkopf, a political consultant who has worked for the governor in the past. “And the speculation will be, ‘See, he wants to run.’”

Mr. Cuomo, in his second term, steadfastly denies this, saying his sole concern is running New York and seeking re-election in 2018. And talk of 2020 does seems premature, considering that Mr. Trump, a fellow New Yorker, has yet to be inaugurated.

If Mr. Cuomo ran for the White House someday, it would be a remarkable turnaround for a man whose career had been written off on more than one occasion, nearly succumbing to political miscalculations. It would also offer the intriguing story line of a son’s fulfilling a mission endlessly contemplated, but never executed, by his father, former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, who was also a Democrat.

Political consultants note several factors in the governor’s favor, including his ability to raise money: Mr. Cuomo already has a re-election war chest of nearly $20 million. He has also shown a willingness to blast Washingtonian dysfunction and Trumpian values, announcing shortly after the election in a fund-raising email that “as New Yorkers, we have fundamentally different philosophies than what Donald Trump laid out in his campaign,” something he echoed in his remarks on Monday.

“Let the great State of New York serve as a safe harbor for our progressive principles and social justice that made America,” the governor said.

There are other possible pluses, strategists say, including his age, 59; his religious background as a Catholic, potentially popular in Rust Belt states; and his current occupation as governor, an executive-branch position that has allowed politicians to rack up résumé-building accomplishments. The role, however, can come with unflattering headlines.

Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, has twice investigated the governor’s office, and brought down two of Albany’s most powerful politicians: the former State Assembly speaker Sheldon Silver and the former Senate majority leader Dean G. Skelos, both convicted of federal corruption charges in late 2015.

While Mr. Cuomo has never been accused of any wrongdoing, Mr. Bharara indicted the governor’s closest aide, Joseph Percoco, in the fall as part of a wide-ranging bribery and bid-rigging investigation. Mr. Cuomo has repeatedly described himself as shocked and heartbroken by Mr. Percoco’s alleged actions, but a conviction could reflect badly on the governor, as could Albany’s reputation for corrupt politics.

Mr. Cuomo’s record also has warts: His economic programs — including the so-called Buffalo Billion, a donor-friendly initiative that drew Mr. Bharara’s attention — have suffered more than a few problems, and his poll numbers are not exactly spectacular.

There’s a certain Willy Loman aspect to Mr. Cuomo: He’s liked, but not well liked, even in his home state. A Quinnipiac University poll released last month showed that half of New York voters supported the governor’s taking on the policies of Mr. Trump, but 56 percent did not want him to run for president. His approval rating was 49 percent; and only 34 percent did not approve. And while Mr. Cuomo is known for having a savvy political mind, few would rave about his retail political skills.

Michael Shnayerson, the author of “The Contender,” a 2015 biography of Mr. Cuomo, said that “there isn’t a Democrat of his generation who has a better résumé for president than Andrew Cuomo.” He cited the governor’s experience working for his father’s campaigns, a stint as federal housing secretary and a term as New York attorney general. But, he added, Mr. Cuomo’s bare-fisted political style also sometimes suggests “a dark, Nixonian character, harsh and vindictive.”

“Ironically, that’s what makes him so fascinating,” Mr. Shnayerson said. “He’s so unlike the rest of the field. And there are moments, still, when he pounds the progressive pulpit, that you hear his father’s voice, and the goose bumps come, and you think, ‘Maybe so.’”

Any national campaign would be a referendum on Mr. Cuomo’s time in Albany, which is nearly synonymous with corruption, though his administration noted it has “passed more ethics reform in the last six years than the state had in the last 60.”

Still, Ben Tulchin, Mr. Sanders’s pollster during the 2016 campaign, argued that Mr. Cuomo was “not exactly the poster child of clean, good government.” He added that the governor’s reputation as “a corporate Democrat” would require “a significant and consistent effort” to win over many progressives.

“Just because you embrace some of Bernie’s progressive agenda,” Mr. Tulchin said, “doesn’t mean you can carry Bernie’s mantle.”

But veterans of Democratic campaigns see promise in Mr. Cuomo. Christopher Lehane, an executive at Airbnb and a Democratic consultant who has worked for Bill Clinton and Mr. Cuomo, said the governor’s more liberal accomplishments — including efforts on transgender rights and juvenile criminal justice reform — have been amplified by his position in New York, the nation’s largest media market.

“Successful governors are both show horses and workhorses,” Mr. Lehane said. “And he has been a successful governor in a state with a high degree of complexity.”

For his part, Mr. Cuomo has certainly seemed intent on burnishing his accomplishments of late, recently comparing his administration’s actions to the likes of Robert Moses and Franklin D. Roosevelt, and even citing a certain Greek philosopher.

“You know Aristotle’s formula for success,” the governor said late last month. “Two steps: Come up with a great idea. Second step is get it done.”