The presidential race is in a holding pattern as Bernie Sanders contemplates whether to stay in, and President Trump hunkers down in Washington to confront the coronavirus.

Last week, Joe Biden was denouncing the president’s herky-jerky response to the virus and offering his own proposals on how to handle it. How does he adjust now that Trump has changed his tune and is working on a bipartisan plan to address the crisis?

For now, Biden is at home in Delaware, coping with a campaign lull that might otherwise be a prime opportunity for some high-dollar fund-raising, except that — oh, right — the stock market is tanking.

Both he and Trump are probably wondering right now just how badly the virus will cut into their campaign war chests.

The next few Democratic primaries have been pushed back, and none are scheduled for the next couple of weeks. In Wisconsin, which is scheduled to vote on April 7, Democrats sued on Wednesday to force election officials to extend the deadline for online voter registration and vote-by-mail applications.

Trump signed emergency legislation on Wednesday providing benefits, virus testing, and food and health care aid. The bill was written in the Democratically controlled House and quickly approved by the Republican-led Senate, but the G.O.P. is fully expecting to get the last word on this. The Senate is working with Trump to offer a stronger bill, with loans to businesses and direct cash payments to taxpayers. The stimulus is expected to cost $1 trillion, outmatching even the $800 billion package that President Barack Obama signed in 2009.

After Sanders lost three primaries by double digits on Tuesday, the watchword for him was “assessing.” Both he and his campaign manager separately said that’s what they were doing on Wednesday. Sanders remains devoted to pressing for his core principles: universal health care, higher taxation on the wealthy, a Green New Deal and withdrawing from foreign wars. But he faces a wrenching decision about whether to go on when victory seems mostly out of reach and voters could be imperiled just by showing up to the polls.

On Wednesday Sanders testily dismissed a question from a CNN reporter about the fate of his candidacy, saying that he was “dealing with a”  — freaking, let’s say — “international crisis.”

Trump’s path to the Republican nomination has gone from virtually assured to virtually guaranteed. There’s a difference! And its name is Bill Weld, the former Massachusetts governor, who was Trump’s last challenger until he dropped out of the race on Wednesday. In a statement announcing the end of his campaign, Weld didn’t name Trump directly but said that “we will truly have lost our compass” as a nation if the president refuses to abide by “the rule of law under our Constitution.”

Bernie Sanders left the Capitol after the Senate passed a coronavirus relief bill.